Trannsinformalizing Humanity

## Main objectives

- Motivate: Formalize it now, refine it later
- Share: Translate between informal and formal senses of a word using formal heuristics
- Share: Use GNNs to model semantic meaning
- Artifact: build a transinformalization flywheel that can autonomously generate new informalizations

v_e = v_e0
A

Loop:
    1. incoming = v_e A
    2. v_e_i := f(v_e_i, incoming_i)




\definition{Love}{When one agent optimizes for the objectives it believes another agent is optimizing for.}{Love(i,j)=\sum_{k\in\mathcal{O}}\frac{O_{i,k}O_{j,k}}{O_{i,k}+O_{j,k}}}
\definition{Love}{When one agent optimizes for the objectives it believes another agent should optimize for.}{Love(i,j)
\definition{Familial love}{The attachment, shared goals, effort to protect, }
\deifnition{Love}{hoping tot maximize the potential for an agent j to contribute (which contributions may or may not return to the agent i).}{Love(i,j)=f_hope(reward(i | action(j)))}

"If you love a flower, you don't pick the flower"

"Attachment manifesting in the combined goal of working with a society of agents to maximize the potential for each agent to contribute to the society."

The more one's 'feelers' are extended, the more one is innoculated against the pain of loss.
You ride on the accumulated immunity of another's sufferring. Eg, structure from army veterans. "Tough love" is this from the other end.
Being open to direction can give you more and more skills.

Love confers a promise of reward from the sender.
The things you're grateful for become the things you love (if they confer a signal of increased likihood of success).

Hope: to "want" something you're "grateful" for.
Hope for success => love
Gratitude: ocnsider an external existance to be good
Desire: recognizing an external existance that could be good
- always chains back to the self, but may or may not be selfish if the self is prjoected onto another sufficiently

All existance and emergent therefrom ultimately map to the physiology of the self.

Desire: recognizing the existance of something (that may or may not exist) that will be beneficial to the self


Desire

Existance => good
Non existance => bad

Increased chance of existance => love => good






Gratitude | Hope
----
Gratitude comes before
Hope is wanting something that you would be grateful for
Having faith that something you would be grateful for to happen



E(x) = ... bit


log(E(x)) = [log bits]


## Outline

1. Introduction
2. Why transinformalize?
   1. Introduce the formal-informal divide
      1. Explain the formal world
      2. Explain the informal world
      3. Compare and contrast
      4. Show why both are necessary
   2. Problem: bridging the gulf
      1. Consider this problem in the abstract
         1. No real world phenomena can be formalized without loss of information.
         2. No formalization can be translated precisely into the real world.
         3. The qualitative dynamics of some phenomena cannot even be captured by formalisms.
         4. Formal systems are effective at taking us far, but only once their 'rails' have already been set in place by their underlying axioms.
         5. Informal approaches are effective at exploring new domains, but should ideally crystallize into formalisms once the domain is understood.
         6. The informal, while powerful in conveying meaning, can sometimes be too vague or subjective to offer concrete solutions to specific problems.
      2. Consider ways to increase their overlap
   3. Why AI needs to bridge the gulf:
      1. we can only optimize what we can formalize.
         1. whether we use heuristics to approximate the environment or control the environment to match our formalization, we must formalize
      2. If we continue treating AI as a formal system, we are bound to run into the same problems that formal systems have always run into.
      3. Any utility we derive from AI will be limited by the extent to which we can formalize its objective into the real world, or conversely, the extent to which we can 'transinformalize' the real world into its objective.
   4. By 'transinformalization' we mean a lose, whimsical system of heuristics barely lifting natural language into formal constructs, yet recognizing that it is not terribly precise or rigorous.
      1. Explain the etymology of the word
      2. The main idea is to soften the formalizations we use, and then create a lot of them that are used liberally to create a sort of "informalization" of the real world. or conversely, to "transinformalize" the real world into the weak formal statements.
         1. Instead of just one objective/eval/metric/etc, Transinformalization considers dozens of related heuristics under words with related meanings
      3. Recognizing that all measured signals eventually carry some degree of uncertainty, and most models likewise fail to capture all of the relevant information, we feel justified in taking this approach.
      4. The following sections will explore this idea in detail, using examples spanning the spectrum of human experience.
         1. Not to be taken as exhaustive, but to inspire the reader to think of their own examples, and provide seeds for autonomous generation of further informalisms. (\ref{sec:autonomous_transinformalization})
3. The architecture of experience
   1. The essence: existance
   2. The experience spectrum
      1. Overview of relevant book sections
   3. The interrelation of experience
   4. The ultimate human experience
      1. At a moment
      2. Over a lifetime
4. Cognition
   1. Motiffs
      1. Perception-Action cycle

   2. Memory
   3. Understanding
   4. Learning
   5. Decision Making
   6. Planning
5. Emotions
   1. Introduction
      1. The spectrum of emotions
      2. The purpose of emotions
      3. The role of emotions in cognition
      4. The role of emotions in society
   2. 
